[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Where ancient wisdom and
modern research converge,
divine science emerges.
What if we could shift our state
of being into higher frequency
through sound?
Can the same power
enhance healing
or improve our well-being?
And could it also
be the catalyst
for creating a
more compassionate,
cooperative planet?
In the symphony of
existence, a force
transcends time and
space, a force that
birthed the universe itself.
This power, resonating
through the fabric of reality
and shaping the
cosmos with each note,
is more than a mere vibration.
It holds the key to profound
healing and the potential
to transform our world.
This power is the
healing power of sound.
>> If you examine the basic
tenets of the various spiritual
traditions on the planet,
you find that they have
a commonality in their belief
that life, the universe,
and everything is created solely
through the power of sound.
In the beginning was the
word, and the Lord said,
let there be light in all
these different traditions.
The God Thot from the
Egyptian tradition
would basically think of
an object, speak its name.
In the Hopi tradition,
the Spiderwoman
sings the song of creation over
the different inanimate objects
and brings them to life.
So the understanding is that
everything is vibration.
Our quantum physicists
and our ancient mystics
are in agreement, everything
is in a state of vibration.
>> Sound can impact materia,
whether it's water, sand, clay,
air molecules, whatever it may
be sound impacts that materia
and it shapes it.
It brings it into form.
And they talk about from
the creation cosmology
that in the beginning was the
word, in the beginning was
some form of sound
or utterance that
then shaped the universe
that brought it into being.
And within us, sound
has so many effects,
not only on what we
hear and the way that
stimulates our neurology, but
it vibrates every molecule,
every cell within our being.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If the structure of spacetime
is all vibration of light,
then at some stage that
vibration of light converts
to another form of vibration,
which we call sound.
And at the moment of that
conversion, the waveforms that
make up the luminescence
of everything's existence
and the structure
of matter itself
become the patterns that we see
molecular structures forming.
And patterns in molecular
structures we know
are changed and
adjusted by sound
as well as can form different
kinds of sound in themselves.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> When we hear sound, it's also
feeding energy into your whole
body, into every
organ of the body.
And if you think
about in cymatics
how you have the beautiful
mandala-like sacred geometric
shapes that get created by a
singular frequency of sound
coming through the water and
then our body is 70% water,
you have to really question
whether the sounds that you're
listening to are creating
harmonic arrangements
and formations within all
that water within your body
or whether it's
creating disharmonic.
So we really want to
use sound in a way that
creates the harmonic
frequencies within.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Sound is very powerful,
whether it carries meaning
or on a language level or
it is sound within nature,
sound of the ocean,
sound of the wind.
All of these are very important
in our physiological constructs
as we evolved through evolution.
And they are registered there.
And they have an
effect on us that
can be on an emotional
level, on a mental level,
but also on a
physiological level.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Sound is the basic
reality of life.
You find it in all things.
As we have discovered
through acoustical physics,
everything has sounds.
Everything is
vibratory processes.
In terms of our
human experience,
we deal with a soundscape
from 20 to 20,000 hertz.
We are continually
absorbing and transmitting
sound energy, which is
a clue to understanding
the refinements of how that
inner universe within us
connects with the
greater universe
of the stars around us.
We are in essence biotransducers
or organic vehicles
of sending and receiving
sound on all levels.
Essentially, sound
is the definition
of holistic life
patterns that compose
the process of evolution.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Within the realm of
human perception,
we hear sounds from
20 to 20,000 hertz.
But what exists beyond?
In physics, forces
operate outside the scope.
Can a unified field
theory bridge this divide
by incorporating
consciousness, thus uniting
science and spirituality?
>> Now in most modern
theories of the unified field,
they actually talk about
vibrating particles
or components.
So even in the most
modern understanding
of what could be the ultimate
source of everything,
there is this introduction of
the idea of vibrating strings.
It is in what they
call the string theory.
And the different vibrations
within those strings
actually create the different
elementary particles
which then become atoms
and molecules, et cetera.
So even from the most
advanced scientific level,
sound is being reintroduced
as an important aspect
of the original silence
vibrating within itself.
Consciousness is primary.
It's the substrate
of all that there is.
Consciousness
reflecting on itself
reflects through, we can call
it a vibration, a reverberation.
If we see that from a
transducer perspective,
we can see it as visual
waves, or we can actually
look at it as a vibration.
And vibration means sound.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We are co-creators
of a musical/soundscape.
We are conductors of
our body parts, which
in and by themselves create what
I call syntony or inner sound
synergy.
The music of DNA, the
higher vibratory patterns
allows us telepathically to
feel another person's mind
by the sensitivity
of sound waves
that are in essence
inaudible to our normal ear
but certainly presentable
and understandable in terms
of the inner workings
of our psyche.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> In recent years, an
increasing body of evidence has
supported what the ancients have
known and practiced for eons.
Sound, music, and vibration
have a profound influence
on our physical bodies.
Recent studies have delved
into how specific frequencies
significantly impact our
physiology and psychology,
revealing the potent potential
of sound as a tool for healing.
>> There is actually a lot of
scientific work showing how
sound can heal.
One of the easiest and
most important ways
is through stress reduction.
And this was really pioneered
by a man by the name of Herbert
Benson in the 1980s who came
up with the relaxation response
showing that if you basically
sounded a word repeatedly,
a one-syllable word frequently,
even the word one would work--
obviously there are
many different mantras--
you would get a reduction
of heart rate, respiration,
and brain waves.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
>> The Karolinska Institute from
Sweden has found that nitric
oxide, which is a
powerful vasodilator,
which means it loosens
your circulatory system
and it's also a great viral
and antibacterial molecule is
generated when we hum.
When we hum, we actually
generate 15 times the amount
of nitric oxide, which
is pretty amazing.
A colleague of mine,
John Stuart Reid
has done wonderful work showing
that different musical sounds
will literally help regenerate
and reactivate the red blood
cells.
>> If you take each organ in
the body or different parts
of the body and you recognize
that each of them is like
a bell, each of them has a
particular resonant frequency.
By applying the right
sounds to the right places
inside the body, we can restore
the body's natural state
of vibration and a
healing response occurs.
>> In the study of
cymatics, for example,
they showed that each organ
of the body has its own unique
signature sound.
And it would sound
harmonious when
it's healthy and disharmonious
when it's becoming diseased.
And then they reversed that
process of, OK, well, what
if we take the signature
of a healthy organ
and then reverse engineer
that sound and then
input that sound into the body.
And they showed
that indeed it does
bring a state of homeostasis and
restoration to a healing state.
>> This is a new discovery for
certain frequencies of sound.
Sound has been
discovered to dissolve
amyloids or plaques that
are in Alzheimer's disease.
It's a research
that is in progress.
Our research is still
advanced in a sense
that using the
sounds of the Veda
for different parts
of the body based
on the structure
of the Vedic sounds
and the structure of the body
is something we are developing.
And it's coming along.
There have been a
couple of papers
that have been
written on that that
show the effectiveness
of what we call
Vedic vibration on improvement
of physiological functioning
from different perspectives.
[VEDA MUSIC]
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
Sound not only impacts
our physical well-being
but also has a profound effect
on our mind and emotions.
Sound affects consciousness,
and consciousness shapes sound.
By understanding
this relationship,
we gain the ability
to consciously
use sound to transform our
physical selves as well
as our core consciousness.
The ancient practice known as
sound healing therapy, which
has gained popularity
in recent decades
offers a path to self-discovery
and spiritual growth
through intention
and meditation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> As a sound healer, my
intention is to harmonize
the body instrument because
each of us is our own instrument
with our own signature.
We have so many
multiple frequencies
running through our body.
And when we work to
harmonize these aspects
in our body, the mind,
the body, and spirit
it allows us to open
up these pathways
to allow greater conscious
alignment to move in
through us.
The more that our vehicle
is in harmony, the more
that we are capable of
receiving messages from spirit
or being in alignment with our
hearts and our authenticity.
[NON-ENGLISH SINGING]
As a finely tuned
instrument, we are
more capable of being
our authentic selves.
A lot of times when we have
stagnancy or stuck energy
in the body or perhaps
trauma, whether it
be physical or emotional,
this can create blockages
in the body, which would
lead to on small levels
changes in our attitude.
And then on bigger
levels of stagnation
we tend to develop
dis-ease in the body.
Crystal balls are a very
powerful sound healing
instrument because of the
crystalline energy affecting
the crystalline
energy in our body.
The particular bowls that I
use are 432 hertz frequency.
And when they're played
around a person who
might be laying in
front of them goes
into these areas in the body
and resonates a frequency
related to what frequencies
that we actually
do have inside of us.
[HUMMING]
>> The concept of putting
intention onto the sound
and being affected by the
intention of the sound was
first validated by a Doctor John
Diamond who brought behavioral
kinesiology to the planet.
And he found that our
muscles tested strong
when we were exposed to
different thoughts, ideas,
and particularly music encoded
with different thoughts
or ideas.
>> The ancient shamanic
traditions of using sound
as a means for healing,
for creating that resonance
it's through the
principle of entrainment.
And entrainment is a
scientific principle
where when you
bring one thing that
can vibrate at a
certain frequency
and you bring it into
proximity of another thing that
has the potential to vibrate
at that same frequency in time,
it will bring the two things
into this entrainment,
into this synchronization and
vibration together in phase.
So if we want to relax
into a meditative state,
for example, we
can listen to sound
that will be really
soothing, calming,
and even if you have some
binaural brainwave entrainment
behind it, it will very
quickly induce an altered state
into a theta state or
a light alpha state.
If you want to be in a
heightened gamma state,
you can use sounds that are more
uplifting and kind of really
get you juiced up and creative,
but at the same time, very
alert of the outer world.
So we can use sound very much
to shift consciousness at will.
There was a study at UC Irvine
called the Mozart Effect
where when people were
listening to classical music,
for example, it helped
to raise their IQ test
scores by at least 9 points
versus when they were not
listening to any music or
when they were listening
to other types of music.
So it's got to be
like designer music
where it's tuned to
the right patterns
and the right frequencies and
the right tuning scale is going
to have a very profound
effect upon our states
of consciousness and access to
greater amounts of information.
[CLASSICAL MUSIC]
>> The power of sound is
not only limited to musical
instruments.
Mantras, singing,
humming, praying,
and intentional
speaking are all forms
in which the human voice
is used as the tool
to speak reality into existence.
Some experts suggest
that what you put out
is what you create and
attract with the potential
to shift the consciousness
and reality that surrounds us.
[CHOIR MUSIC]
>> They say in ancient
metaphysical teachings that all
magic is spoken or by my words,
so shall it be that as we take
our intention and then we
express it outwardly through
sound, through words, and
especially certain ancient
words and ancient languages
are like formulas of creation.
So you bring certain letters
and power names and so forth
together, and you're
communicating to the universe
what you want to manifest.
So that's one way that it
could be used in ritual work,
for example.
Another way is through chants
and mantras and toning.
And as we tone not only are
you expressing it outwardly,
but there's the
internal vibration
as well that is creating a
more parasympathetic system.
It's stimulating
the vagus nerve.
It's creating this
vibration inside.
It alters you.
Toning is a very powerful way
to shift consciousness and also
bring in energy.
So when I'm toning, for
example, like for 15 minutes
with certain divine
names or words of power,
that could give
me the same effect
like an hour-long
meditation in silence.
So it's a very powerful tool
to help shift us into a more
heightened spiritual state.
[HUMMING]
>> When we speak about
the sounds of the Vedas,
for example, the basic
importance is the silence
in the sense that this is
what gives it structure--
how much there is high and low
and where there is silence,
where there is stopping between
different values of the sound
otherwise it's a
continuous sound.
And this is where the structure
becomes important and giving
the best effect
on the physiology
through the
punctuation of silence.
[HUMMING]
It's not like the silence
punctuating the sound,
but it's like the sound
punctuating the silence.
And ultimately,
the transcendence,
the field of all possibilities
is a field of silence.
>> Across the cosmos, from
the grand expanse of galaxies
to the subtle resonance
of subatomic particles,
sound is the fundamental
essence of existence.
>> I think the big takeaway
from the power of sound is that
everything is vibration, and
everything in that vibration is
all about the frequencies.
And we can use sound as a
way to very quickly shift
our vibration.
So if you're ever
feeling low or in a sort
of negative or down
state, if you just
start working with the
right sounds and frequencies
or your own toning
and voice, you
can shift your frequency at
will to a much higher, more
peaceful, more balanced,
and resonant state.
So it's a very
powerful tool that we
can use to shift
our state of being
and elevate it to
a higher state.
>> I truly think sound is one
of the most profound parts
of our experience
and our existence,
and yet few of us truly look at
the power it can have to change
our lives.
It's very important
in this time that we
get more in touch with the
nature of the gifts of sound
and its capacity to
transform us, to heal us,
and to make us better in
all the ways that we can be.
>> I hope that humanity will
recognize that we are a part
of a living vehicle of
attunement to the cosmic forces
and laws of the universe which
operate through vibration.
I hope that we begin to
realize our thoughts are
like musical notes
and patterns that we
can orchestrate into patterns
of harmony and well-being.
And finally, I
believe that as we
begin to use the sound
ciphers mathematically
in decoding the ancient texts,
even like our Torah scriptures
or Biblical scriptures or for
that matter of the Far East
the Sutra texts, that we'll
be able to bring together
a greater harmony between
science and spirituality.
And the meaning
of the two will be
like alpha and omega, the
coming together of sound
within and sound of the greater
attunement to the living
universe.
>> Sound is sacred.
And we can use our own sounds
to help manifest reality
with consciousness.
We can even use being
in silence and listening
to the inner sounds as a
tool to tap into the divine.
There is a reason why the
ancient mystic masters
have told impressions that
everything is vibration.
And the power of vibration
is they understand
that sound is an aspect
of whatever creator being
or creator system
that you have it.
And if we resonate
and vibrate with this,
it will enhance our
life, and it will
make things a whole lot better.
And if we can work
with other people,
we can create a cooperative,
compassionate planet
that will be heaven on Earth.
What a blessing?
>> As the distinction between
scientific research and ancient
wisdom becomes
increasingly intertwined,
the power of sound emerges
as a profound mediator,
bridging these realms and
echoing the unseen threads that
shape the fabric of reality.
Join us for more episodes
on "Divine Science"
where we continue exploring the
crossroads of modern research
and ancient wisdom.
[MUSIC PLAYING]